docs: Add Scala 3.6.0 postmortem blog post (#1711)
scala/scala-lang: _posts/2024-10-24-post-mortem-3.6.0.md

---
category: announcement
permalink: /news/post-mortem-3.6.0.html
title: "Postmortem of Scala 3.6.0"
by: Scala Core Team
---

Incident Date: _October 18th, 2024_  
Nature of the incident: _Accidental release of 3.6.0-RC1 under 3.6.0 on Maven
Central_

On Friday, 18th of October 2024, during the publication process of **3.6.0-RC1**
an incident occurred that ended up in publishing Scala **3.6.0** instead. After

> an internal investigation, we pinpointed the incident to be of technical nature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an internal investigation, we pinpointed the incident to be technical in nature.
```

> Within one hour of catching the issue, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within one hour of the issue being reported, the
```

> [Scala Core Team](https://scala-lang.org/scala-core/) mitigated the problem and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Scala Core Team](https://scala-lang.org/scala-core/) mitigated the problem by
```

> started the Scala **3.6.1** release – that is to be treated as RC, which is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
starting the Scala **3.6.1** release – which is to be treated like an RC; it has been
```

available since Saturday 19th October. Scala **3.6.0** was abandoned and
promptly announced to the public as broken.

We apologize to the Scala users for any inconvenience it might have caused. We
are working on better understanding what led up to this accident and ensuring it
doesn’t happen again.

We invite you to follow the recommendations below and find out more details
about our findings of what happened and what is done to prevent future accidents
of this kind.

## Recommendations

Use version 3.5.2, the current stable Next version, recommended for general
use.  
Use version 3.6.1 as an RC version, to be used only for testing.  
DO NOT USE 3.6.0, not for testing, not for anything, it’s considered broken.

We are working on 3.6.2 as the new stable release, which will be available
sometime in the second half of November.

## How does it affect users?

Scala 3.6.0 is a broken release \- it should never be used by users of Scala.

> The results of the compilation might not be consumed by stable versions of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The results of the compilation might not be consumable by stable versions of the
```

compiler or TASTy based tooling.  
Tooling that automatically uses the latest available version of Scala will use
the hot-fix release 3.6.1, which should be treated as a Release Candidate
version. We don’t encourage most users to upgrade yet, unless for testing

> purposes. Instead, use the stable 3.5.2 and wait with upgrades until 3.6.2 is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
purposes. Instead, use the stable 3.5.2 and wait to upgrade until 3.6.2 is
```

out.

## What happened?

During the publication of Scala **3.6.0-RC1** to the Sonatype Maven

> repository**,** a mistake occurred and we released **a misconfigured 3.6.0**

Author: Ach, shouldn't have trusted google docs to export correctly. Will check the original doc, thanks!

> repository**,** a mistake occurred and we released **a misconfigured 3.6.0**

Author: Actually, the coma was bold in the doc, so google docs did the correct thing. Will fix, thanks again!

instead. As a result, the released version of the compiler produces TASTy files
in the experimental version that cannot be consumed by stable TASTy consumers
(e.g. the Scala compiler, tasty-query, Scaladoc). Setting the TASTy version to
an experimental one is a standard procedure when releasing a new release

> candidate of a minor version of Scala 3\.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
candidate of a minor version of Scala 3.
```

Author: Thanks, fixed!

  Scala Next to the 3.6.x line.
- We followed up with a hotfix release in the form of Scala 3.6.1 on the
  following day.

## Why did we need 3.6.1?

Some tools in the Scala ecosystem can refer to the latest stable Scala version
that’s been published on Maven Central. Those include:

- Scala CLI / the `scala` runner (via `-S 3` from the command line or with the
  `//> using scala 3` using directive)
- coursier (with `cs setup` and `cs install scala` sub-commands)
- potentially other tooling integrating with `coursier`

We were concerned Scala users might use this unknowingly broken version of the
compiler to produce artifacts with the experimental version of TASTy. In
particular, we wanted to prevent publishing Scala libraries from being published
to the (immutable) Maven repository using a broken Scala release. It could also
potentially affect applications using Scala 3.6.0 that would try to use
libraries produced by Scala 3.6.1 or later.

We decided to publish Scala 3.6.1 as a follow-up ASAP so that the most recent
version doesn’t include the experimental TASTy flag nor RC settings. With 3.6.1
we ensured tooling will, at the very least, refer to a Scala version that

> actually could be considered stable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actually could be considered reasonably stable.
```

  considered as in the meantime there was a change in staff coupled with
  insufficient documentation.
- We experienced unrelated downtime on the side of our infrastructure, which
  delayed the (as it was meant to be) release of 3.6.0-RC1 from Wednesday 16th
  to Friday 18th of October. Given that it was an RC, we continued the queued
  job on Friday. We now realize we should have postponed it further until Monday
  21st. Resolving the incident would have been a lot easier for the Core and
  Compiler teams on a weekday rather than on a Friday night.

## How do we stop it from repeating?

In conclusion, after all that we learned from this incident, we are introducing
the following processes as preventative measures:

- Extra checks to the release procedure to ensure the correct versioning of
  published Scala artifacts.
- Any changes related to either release scripts or compiler versioning will be
  tested using a custom Maven repository before the start of a public release.
- Additional, manual approval of published artifacts to the staging Maven
  repository.
- We will be mindful of the day of week for releases, and avoid Thursdays and

>   Fridays at all costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Fridays.
```
